# Distributed Storage Nodes
Distributed storage nodes is developed to gain the working knowledge of how storage system like cassandra databases work in production and provide some of the features. With this project I am particullarly interested in learning
1. how cassandra does replication using merkle tree on live production data which has writes happening
2. writes to storage nodes are handled to provide durability
3. reads are offered by storage nodes
4. quorom is implemented to prodivde tunable consistency
5. understand node failure are handled. Particularly, I want to understand how other nodes decide a particular node is dead and then take over.
6. how consistent hashing is implemented. With this I am particularly interested in understanging how nodes take over the load of dead nodes
7. how is it decided that which node will handle the incoming request.
8. Understand the working of gossip protocol.
9. Implement a method such that any node can handle arbitary traffic, such that, if it receives traffic for request/data which it doesn't own then it redirects the traffic to original node.

## PRD
Go is used, because I am familiar with it and nice developer experience.

1. There are storage nodes. 
2. Each storage node handles subset of data based on key range.
3. Cluster is collection of storage node, with atleast 1 storage node.
4. Communication happens using REST over HTTP. For the purpose of this project REST is sufficient.
5. We can remove the concept of cluster or coordinator node entirely, and when an node starts we can supply the seed node which can act as cluster node.


# Adding Gossip & Enabling nodes to handle all traffic
In my attempt to create distributed storage nodes in order to learn a lot of principles of distributed systems and cassandra. I have gotten this far - I've storage nodes and a coordinator nodes.

coordinator node is also called cluster. 

each time a new node is started, it has no "id", "host" and "EndOfKeyRange" details in it. In cluster there is a endpoint /addnode which add nodes information it in list of known nodes and also updates the node metadata in the node by called /node/init endpoint on storage node. which adds id, host, and EndOfKeyRange details in the node.

EndOfKeyRange property of the storage node directly tells node what range of hashes (hases of key) in the consistent-hash-ring it is responsible for. If a node has EndOfKeyRange as X, then it handles the traffic of hash<=X. FOr more details if there are three nodes in consistent-hash-ring with EndOfKeyRange values of nodea->10, nodeb->50, nodec->100, then nodea handles traffic of all hashes of key <=10, nodeb handles (10,  50], nodec handles (50, 100].

each storage node in the cluster also has gossip behavior, when nodes are added to cluster using /addnode endpoint in cluster, all existing nodes are informed about new-nodes using /updategossip endpoint. when node receives gossip on /updategossip endpoint, they add the new node their their 'gossipNodes' list that they maintain. in the list they maintain information about all known nodes along with the host (ip:port), their id  (uuid), their EndOfKeyRange, and their lastUpdate (timestamp field).

anytime a node recieves get or post traffic, it checks whether it owns the key, that is hash(key) ->token is <= EndOfKeyRange among all nodes, if so then it handles the traffic other wise it find the owner and redirects the traffic to owner nodes and serves the response.

all nodes also gossip on fixed interval letting all known nodes with its own updated timestamp. there fore each node maintains withit all known nodes and their lastKnown update timestamp in cluster (gossip protocol)


# Removing Cluslter Abstraction
1. At present, new node is needed to be added into the cluster manually. When new node is added into cluster using /addnode endpoint, cluster informs all other nodes in the cluster about new node using /upategossip endpoint. Then the nodes take over the responsibility to informing other nodes about their health status using gossip protocol. 
2. Now that I've had more time to think about design and implementation; need of cluster seems unnecessary. I am thinking when new node start up, it can be supplied seed node, that is, the details of existing nodes. New node then can communicate with supplied nodes to get more detailed picture of the cluster.
3. Also, at present when new node is created, the node gets to decide its EndOfKeyRange property. After reading more about it, this is not the normal approach, normally, the node joins the largest range. I am thinking, we can make things easier and support both my approach and the "normal" way. 
4. I am going to implement following functionality. When the first node starts, it alone. There are no seed nodes. It services traffic alone and becomes the seed node for future nodes. Further ndoes that start up, gets the first node details as seed node and with gossip gets more detailed picture into the cluster.
5. When new node starts up, it may optionally provide its EndOfKeyRange. If EndOfKeyRange is provided, it joins the cluster with that range, otherwise, when node starts gossiping - it waits sometime to have more clear picture of the cluster and then - decides its EndOfKeyRange. (Possible: I am aware that it maybe possible that if two nodes start at the same time may get the same picture of the cluster and may decide on same EndOfKeyRange. I will get back to this in future - maybe)
6. Also, when new node starts up and has EndOfKeyRange, it will start to serve data without replication. Replication is  going to nice brain exercise soon.
7. Cluster abstraction is removed. We can start with following 
```
# start a node, this node will act as seed node for other nodes
# to find more details on support flags using go run nodes/main.go --help
go run nodes/main.go -eokr=18446744073709551615 -host=http://0.0.0.0:7770

# start other nodes 
go run nodes/main.go -port=7771 -seed=http://0.0.0.0:7770 -eokr=9223372036854775808 -host=http://0.0.0.0:7771

go run nodes/main.go -eokr=4611686018427387904 -host=http://0.0.0.0:7772 -port=7772 -seed=http://0.0.0.0:7770
```

# New Node with Data Replication 
1. At present, system has now reached to point where nodes are decoupled nodes and no need of cluster or coordinator. New nodes can be spun up with details of seed node and can further communicate with other nodes in cluster using gossip protocol.
2. So far, when new nodes are added into the cluster they takeover the ownership of keys lying in its EndOfKeyRange without ensuring weather it has all of available data of that range to serve reads.
3. To get to the point where new nodes, when added to the cluster, esure they replicate all the data into their storage before they start serving, I need to introduce concept of state. New node start with 'joining' state. Once new nodes have enough information of cluster from all the gossiping, they change their state to Bootstraping. During this state, they have decided their EndOfKeyRange, it start replicating data from source node. Once replication is complete and all new writes are also available in the new node it changes state to available. It also informs the orginal owner node about it state change to 'available' immediately along with its EndOfKeyRange, so that all the writes that original node is getting will now be redirected to new node. 
4. Detailed thought process: two nodes A & C in cluster are serving traffic with [0, X] & (X, Z] as their key ranges respectively. A new node B is inserted into cluster. This node has its EndOfKeyRange provided when it started (I'll think about auto calculating EndOfKeyRange later). All new nodes start with state "Joining". New Node B starts with seednode as A. Node B gossips with the other nodes in cluster and gets detailed picture. After sometime, lets say 3 cycles of gossips (or fixed time or so that the number of unique nodes in gossips list doesn't change - that would mean  new node has info of all nodes in cluster), new node B starts next phase "Bootstrapping".  In this phase, new node B request source node, say node C, for all data that should be under the ownership of node B. While this is happening, original owner node C will continue to serve reads and write. While the replication is going on, handling read traffic is trivial. Read traffic can be served from original node. However, handling write traffic isn't as trivial. There are few things that comes to my mind when I think of this challenge. First is dual write. In this while the replication is 
going on, all the writes that are coming the owner node will be written to owner node's storage as well as new node's storage. This approach is however prone to a race-condition. Example: assume key K with value V1 is stored in owner node. During replication key K and vlaue V1 is read from owner node and is in flight towards the new node but during that time write comes for K with value V2. This write is successfully written to owner node. So owner node contains K, V2. Also, this write is asynchronously sent to new node. It is possible that new key value (K, V2) beats the original request to replicate key K with value V1 such that the new node has value (K, V2) in store then the original replication request with (K, V1) comes, then the new node will have key value of (K, V1) even though replication has succeeded and original node has (K, V2). To handle this, I am thinking along the lines of versions. timestamps are easy solution to this problem, key and value with higher timestamps wins, however, timestamps do not work in real world distributed systems because of timedrift challenges related to time syncrhonization. Therefore, for versions, I am thinking using counters. The very first time a key and value is written it gets version 1. Subsequent writes on that key increases the version counter (there is still the challenge of atomic writes in storage, but that shouldn't as challenging). Lets go through the original example with this versioning system. Original node and (Key K, Value V1, Version 1) in storage. new node request replication. original node and new node starts the replication process. While the replication is going on, read requests are served by original node. When write request comes for (Key K, Value V2) - original node services the write such that (Key K, Value 2, Version 2) is now stored in original nodes storage. Original node also send aync write request of (Key K, Value V2, Version 2) to new node while the original repication request (Key K, Value V1, Version 1) is still in flight. Similar to previous scenario, the original replication request gets delayed and new request of version 2 reaches the new node first. Therefore the original node has (Key K, Value V2, Version 2) in its storage. And then the original request reaches the new node (Key K, Value V1, Version 1). However when it comes to mutating the storage it will fail because the Version 1 is lower than Version 2. With this approach, the original node and new node is guaranteed to eventually converge to same state (unless the request fails).
5. In the approach outlined above using versions to ensure both new and old node convere to same approach. Replication ensures that old data is consumed and new data is available as it comes. However, I still have figured out when does replication stop.? Lets say the original node is getting bombarded with writes for the key range range it owns and this is the exact reason we are adding additional node to take some load off it. In that scenario, the new writes are comming as replication is happening. To be more concrete, assume replication can handle 1 key/sec. And new writes are coming to original node with new keys which now lie in new nodes key range at the same rate of 1 key/sec. In this scenario - the replication process will go on indefinitely and new node will indefinitely remain unuseable, defeating the purpose of why it was added in the first place. This challenge is easier to handle than the previous one, imo. When new node starts the replication with original node. Any writes that happen the key range out side of new node that lies in the onwership of original node remains unaffected. And there are two possible types of write that can happen on the key range the new node is responsible. Either the write is to mutate the existing key or insert a new key. After the replication has started, any new writes which inserts a new key into the store will directly be redirected to new node. And mutations will be written in original store and new node as well. With this approach. This approach ensures there is finite key space for replication to handle. And once that finite set is replicated, new node has all dataset it should. For reads during replication, the original node does parallel search in original node and old node and return the value with highest version. After replication has completed successfully, the new node updates its status to "Available", informs orignal node immediately. So that original node will now redirect all read and writes traffic to new node. There are certain challenges still in this design. Challenges: if new node fails to complete replication, writes for key, value are lost. It is clear to me, after thinking about it for a bit, that in any strategy, the original node must also maintain the update to date copy of data until the node is finally ready to serve traffic independently. This is because, during the transition, it maybe possible that new node fails to completely take the full ownership and may crash.
6. There is another strategy of replication. The other strategy of replication involves that new node ask the original node of the data. The original node, when asked for replica of data, starts streaming back point-in-time snapshot of the data. Any changes made since point-in-time snapshot are stored in wal/log. lets think about strategy 1 in more detail. Also, each node has a state, new nodes have Joining. After joining nodes move to state "BOOTSTRAPPING" which means they are gathering data from other sources. Once all the data has been gathered, the state moves to available. Which means it is actively serving traffic. However, what I dont understand in detail is how things work during BOOTSTRAPPING and moving to AVAILABLE state. When node moves from JOINING to BOOTSTRAPPING, it request data from original node. The original node make point-in-time snapshot of the data. Streams it to new node. New node stores that data in its memory. Any changes made after that point-in-time snapshot are preserved in log (wal) file. After the snapshop is replicated, then comes time of handling wal/log. How does that happen? I mean I can replay the changes of wal on the new node but that still doesn't solve the problem that while I am replaying the wal, it will continue to get more changes.
7. With carefull considerations and thoughts, the approach which is hybrid of previous two approach can work. That is, snapshot replication to get bulk of the data with dual writes. To prevent rance conditions and ensure both nodes converge correctly, key level local versioning can be implemented. Detailed Thought: Existing node A & C handle the traffic with key range of [0, X] & (X, Z]. A new node B wants to join the cluster such that node A, B, C, will handle traffic of range [0, X], (X, Y], & (Y, Z]. When new node B starts it start with the State of JOINING. In this state, node doesn't service any traffic. It does the gossiping and get the topology of the cluster. Once it has confident understanding of cluster, it moves to state called BOOTSTRAPPING. In this state, this node starts replication the data from original node. Original node when asked for replica of data, creates a point-in-time snapshot of the data, and streams it back to the new node. While the replication happens, original node is still getting read and write traffic. Original node continues to serve the read traffic normally. However, for write traffic, it will write the data first to its memory and then update the information in new node. Why is it not async?  Each key & value pair now has a version assigned to it. When original node receives write request, it updates the local version of the key to higher value. For example, if write request  (Key K, Value VA) comes and store already have in memory (Key K, Value VX, Version 1) then after update data-store will have (Key K, Value VA, Version 2). Now this new version of value will be replicated to new node. With this approach, in case of replication delay when an attemp is made to override (Key K, Value VA, Version 2) with (Key K, Value Vx, Version 1) it will fail.
8. I've narrowed down and decided to move ahead with following solution. New Node request point-in-time snapshot from original node. Original node when reveives the request creates a snapshot of database (which is a interesting problem statement to solve), the snapshot must be created in such a way that read and write traffic isn't affected. Once the snapshot is ready it starts replication. While the replication is happening, original node will continue to service traffic. Reads are handled normally, while for any write request that is received, the orignial node will carry that out with synchronous dual write to new node. When node receives write - it will first write to its storage, increament the version and then replicate the new versiond data to new node. In this, way once replication ends, we can be sure that new node is ready to serve traffic. Once replication ends, Optionally, we may verify the correctness of the replication using merkle tree?. Anyhow, once replication is completed successfully, new node can change it state to Available and start serving traffic. So to implement this, I need to implement snapshots. Also, there are three states a node can be in - "JOINING", "BOOTSTRAPPING", "AVAILABLE". Only in "AVAILABLE" state a node can service traffic. nodes in "BOOTSTRAPPING" state are not considered for any traffic routing. At this point I am thinking, I should implement naive method of snapshotting and then later on implement a better method using LSM Trees
9. I've added a implementation for replication. In current implementation, new node start with "JOINING" state, start gossip with seed node waits till it have clear picture of all the nodes and then changes its status to "BOOTSRAPPING". As soon as the status changes to bootstrapping, node request replication of point-in-time snapshot from original node. Original node streams the point-in-time snapshot back to the new node. Also, when original node receives the write, it checks for any node that needs these writes as well - (follower node). Original ndoe checks for any follower node by looking at all the nodes it knows about and checks if there is any node which has status "BOOTSTRAPPING" and has EndOfKeyRange just less than original nodes EndOfKeyRange. That is, nodes[ original_node_index - 1].State=BOOTSRAPPING. If that is the case, then current node replicates write to follower node synchronously. This approach, however, has a flaw. The original node only starts replication of new writes/mutation after it gets update of new-nodes state change to "BOOTSTRAPPING" which can be delayed by the very nature of how gossip works. Therefore, it is possible that new writes can be lost between new-node requesting replication and original node starting dual writes. To solve this possibility of lost writes, I am thinking of improving replication strategy. In this new approach, new-node when moves to "BOOTSTRAPPING" state, request point-in-time snapshot from the original node. Original node, when receivest this request, takes the point-in-time snapshot of the db, streams the snapshot back to original events with SSE and any writes/mutations that happen on the datastore which new-node needs to know are also streamed via same conneciton. With this strategy, new-node will receive new-writes from the exact point it requests point-in-time snapshot. Once, the snapshot is streamed back to new-node successfully,it will send event back to new-node informing about susccessful completion of snapshot replication. New node once receiving success events updates it status to "AVAILABLE", which is eventually broadcasted to all nodes, during this time original-node will continue to stream back writes/mutations that happen on it until original node receives the state update of new-node. As the nodes in the cluster learn about new-nodes "AVAILABLE" status, they will start routing required traffic away from original node to new node. Eventually there will come a time when orignial node will not receive any request for mutaions/write which belong to new-node and there will be no events to send back to new-node. Once that state  arises, it will be safe to succesfully close the original replication request connection, as new-node is handling all the traffic. 
10. So far, I've added api endpoint /v1/data/replication which streams point-in-time snapshots and liveMutations. This endpoint closes connections after snapshot replication is completed, new-node state is "AVAILABLE" and no write/mutations are streamed in last 10 seconds. With api being ready, api consumer part is yet to improved. I need to go over the entire lifecycle of node from "JOINING" to "BOOTSTRAPPING" to "AVAILABLE". Also, need to ensure that when node receives "snapshot_replication_complete" event, it ensured it state is changed to "AVAILABLE", after receiving "live_mutation_complete" (request connection should be closed) the new node is serving all new traffic.
11. Replication implementation is done. new node request replication, it receives point-in-time snapshot and all the live mutations. When the point-in-time snapshot replication is complete, new node changes it state to "AVAILABLE" which is eventually propagated to other nodes in cluster. As the nodes receive this updated state, the read and write traffic is directed to new node. Eventually original node stops getting all traffic for data that belongs to new-node. When that happens original node successfully closes the replication.
12. In the current implementation of replication so many things have scope of improvement. At this point, point-in-time snapshot stops all writes during snapshot creation. This can be improved by LSM Tree approach. Datastore stores all the past versions of the key. So, if a particular key is updated a lot, it essentially, maintains all past versions. I've not thought of any approach to handle this yet. Data store after replication doesn't remove the keys which aren't required anymore. I guess this can be improved by LSM tree. All the data at present in in-memory, which could be fine for being Distributed Hash Table, but I want it to be rebootable. Nodes do not have replicas, I am interested in concept of replicas here. Replicas here can help take read traffic and in cassandra any replica node (nodes which own the key range) can take the write. And quorom can be used to tune consistency levels ( this is a interested problem statement to solve).

# Improve Database point-in-time snapshots (PAUSED)
Note: i started on point-in-time snapshots before, but then later understood that solving point-in-time snapshots requires persistence to be solved. Persistence can be solved with some combination of commit-log , creating a view of the log, solving efficient reads as well. Therefore, I'll get back to point-in-time snapshots later.

1. At present, the point-in-time snapshot of database stops all writes to the datastore, and copies all keys. Goal is to improve this such that, the snapshot doesn't stops any writes.
2. there are several things I am thinking about which might help this. There is a need of WAL, when snapshots are requested, current offsets of wal sets as the boundary for requested snapshot. WAL alone cannot help because in order to create the lastest view of the store upto current_offset from wal will require reading through all mutations in wal which will be time consuming operation. Therefore, there is need of checkpointing, at each checkpoint, the view of store is maintained up until that point. With this strategy, checkpoints + replayed wal will improve the efficiency. This entire thing is actually a solved problem with data-structure called LSM Trees. LSM Trees, however, are little more advanced and slightly different usecase. LSM Trees are designed to store data in disk. They provide fast writes and efficient reads on the disk based storage. My simple approach of checkpoint + wal replay should also work for my usecase as I am providing reads and writes from in memory store. After thinking a lot about it, I have decided to go ahead with checkpoints + wal strategy, and later on, if time permits, I can try LSM Tree for learning. 
3. Detailed Thoughts: For every write request that happens on the store, each mutation/write is appended to wal. Each log in wal contains a offset, key, new value and verion. To get the version of the new mutation, existing value of the key is fetched from the store, if value doesn't exist then version is 1 otherwise, version is existing version+1. After the write to wal is successful, the write is updated to the store. The write is considered successfull, as long as write to wal is success. At this point, I am aware that there is a possibility that the node can potentially fail during the writes to the wal - in which case the wal shall have partial write in it. This situation cannot be prevented, however, the partial writes can be detected using CRC (Cyclinc redundancy checks) which is non-cryptographic hash function to find errors in non-malicious inputs. So, for every write, before data is writte in store, a entry in wal file is made with offset, key, value, crc. After successfull write in wal, value is upserted in store. Write is considered successfull after successful write in wal. After configurable amount of time, checkpoints are created. Checkpoints are full view of the store at the given point-in-time. To create a checkpoint, current_offset in wal is requested, then all the mutations that has happens since previous checkpoint are played on the copy of previous checkpoint to get the new checkpoint. For example, lets say a checkpoint is to be created, to create the checkpoint, current offset of of wal is requested which is, say, 100. If there exist no previous checkpoint, a new in memory store(or map) is created in which on the mutations from beginning to offset 100 are played. The state of the in-memory store is, now, point-in-time view of the store at offset 100. The in-memory store is then converted into file such that keys are sorted. lets call this checkpoint 1. While the checkpoint was being created, store continued to get more mutations/writes which continued without affecting checkpointing or getting affected by checkpointing. When the time again comes to created another checkpoint c2, let say wal is at offset 250. Now, inorder to create the checkpoint, checkpoint c1 is loaded into the memory, and all the mutations/writes that happened after offset 100 and uptill checkpoint 250 are played into the checkpoint c1 which is in memory. After this the in-memory representation of checkpoint c1 contains mutations with offset [0, 100] + (100, 250]. This in-memory representation of c1 can now be saved as file into the disk with as checkpoint c2. This process will be repeated indefinitely, until needed. Old checkpoints can be removed if not needed. There are verious ways to remove old checkpoints, such as limiting the number of past checkpoints or limiting the max age of the checkpoints. There is a serious flaw in this strategy however, creating new checkpoints requires loading into memory old checkpoint, which for small data footprint is achieveable, however, as the size of the data grows will require more and more ram (which is super expensive now a days). 
4. After doing some search, I think, there is different approach to create checkpoints. In this strategy, when a checkpoint is requested, current_offset is requested from wal. Then, a new sstable is created from mutations ranging from (prev_checkpoint_offset, current_offset]. Here, prev_checkpoint_offset is the offset will which previous checkpointing has been done. If no checkpoints has been created before then prev_checkpoint_offset is the beginning of the wal (likely 0). the SSTable created from mutations in range (prev_checkpoint_offset, current_offset] is sorted on keys. Previous checkpoint, if any, is also a SSTable sorted on keys. Then, the problem of creating new checkpoint boils down to merging two SSTables which is a solved problem. Merging to SSTables is similar problem statement as that of merging to sorted arrays. This can be achieved on disk directly without having to load any significat portion of files into the memory. After the operation of creating new checkpoint is completed, the new checkpoint is available for use. Present strategy allows the creation of checkpoints efficiently for arbitrarily large checkpoints. However, another challenge with present strategy is every growing wal size. For this problem, I am of the opinion that wal files can be rotated after reaching a reaching a certain threshold size. When the threshold is breached, then mutations/writes are written to new wal file. The offsets in each file begins from 0 (at this point I see no reason to have always increasing offsets) and each new wal file can be named with <timestamp>_wal_v1.txt. At this point, I am of the opinion that wal files can have content write to it in human readable format, and overtime we can update the format to bynary. Binary format in wal, overtime, make sense as it will cover all possble data types without any possibility to caring about non-printable characters and data encoding.
5. Thoughts so far has been about details on how to implement persistence into the cluster. At present, in the cluster, any node can service the request. Node servicing the request is called coordinator node. Internally, cooordinator node redirects the request to the node which own the data range. At present if the owner node becomes unavailable for any reason, there is no handling to redirect the request to next available node. Also there is no replication, therefore, when node dies, data dies with it given all the data is stored in memory. Therefore, persistence needs to be added. Goal of persistence is such that when node with current state S dies then a node with state S can be started to continue servicing the request. I've given a lot of thoughts on how persistence can be added into the existing architecture, give there are so many things that can be done here, I've decided to start with simplest form of persistence that can get the job done. Each write request first writes to the commit log, after write to commit log is successful, then data is persisted into the store. When node dies the mutations from the commit logs are replayed. With this approach, everything time the node dies it will have to relay all the writes from the beginning but this is the starting point. Next step will be to have the 


# Node Replica 
1. At present, each node in the cluster owns the subset of the key range of cluster alone. If for any reason the node dies, the data stored in the node becomes in-accessible. Though the durability of the dead node can be solved using adding persistence to the node but that is a separate problem to be solved. For now, I am focusing on adding replica nodes to add more redundancy to the cluster. 
2. For replica's - there are following things that needs to be defined. ReplicaCount, ReadQuorum, WriteQuorum. ReplicaCount is number of addition node which have copy of the node. If ReplicaCount is 2, that means in addition to owner-node there are 2 additional nodes in the cluster which have the copy of the data. WriteQuorum is how many nodes including owner-node must confirm write for write to be successfull, WriteQuorum has valid values from 1 to <= ReplicaNode+1. For WriteQuorum=1, writes are confirmed for owner-node, for WriteQuorum=2 writes are confirmed for owner-node and 1 additinoal replica. In this approach, it might be possible that WriteQuorum was not met as the requires number of replicas were not available or failed to return response in time - in those scenarios writes are persisted in owner-node (with the goal to replicate later on, however, I've not yet given mush thought on how to sync the replicas with owner-node). As long as owner-node commits write in it, it will be considered success. ReadQuorum can have values in [-1, ReplicaCount]. The value of -1 represent read from owner-node is requested. In this case, the most recent view of the data is guaranteed. For ReadQuorum=1 means read from any one node among owner and replica, this is default behavior, ReadQuorum=2 means read from any two node among owner and replica, in case there are two different versions are returned by different node, most recent version is returned. ReplicaCount is cluster level construct, this means all nodes in the cluster will have same ReplicaCount. ReadQuorum and WriteQuorum are request level construct.
3. So far added logic to send replication request to replica nodes, for next step, I have to add implementation of /v1/data/raw. (To Be Continued)
4. I've implemented replication in write path, which means, at the time of post /v1/data the request is replicated to next REPLICA_COUNT number of nodes.
5. With this latest patch - I've added the handling for replicas in get/data endpoints as well. Now, both get/data and post/data manages the replicas for the key. Additionally there is a concept of Quorum and ReplicaCount implemented.
6. A node when starting up can be provided details of seed node, so that new node can gossip with seed node to learn about the cluster topology. However, when the node is not supplied with details of seed node it is considered as seed node. A seed node when starting is required to be supplied with REPLICA_COUNT argument. REPLICA_COUNT is defined as number of additional copy of data which must exist in the cluster in addition to original copy. So if REPLICA_COUNT is 2, that means there are total 3 copies of a single key value pair - 1 original and 2 replicas. For the purpose of this learning exercise, the next two nodes in the right are contains the replica. The valid values for READ_QUORUM and WRITE_QUORUM are based of that of REPLICA_COUNT. READ_QUORUM has valid values from [-1, REPLICA_COUNT]. For READ_QUORUM of -1, the value of requested key is fetched from owner-node, for READ_QUORUM of 0 value is fetched from the current node whether or not current node is owner-node or replica-node or not. For example of a request to get key=K lands of a arbitary node N then the key is looked up in node N's store. For READ_QUORUM value of R where R belong in range [1, REPLICA_COUNT] the R random replica's are requested for values, the value with most recent version is returned. WRITE_QUORUM has valid values in range [-1, REPLICA_COUNT]. Irrespective to the value of WRITE_QUORUM the value is first written to the OWNER_NODE. Then the key, value, version are written to REPLICA_NODES. If the write to owner-node fails for any reason, complete write is considered as failed. This is a flaw that is present in the present architecture, in future, improvements can be made such that if owner-node is unavailable, the next available node accepts the write, and as and when new owner-node becomes available (or new node is chosen as owner) the write is propagated to that node. For the WRITE_QUORUM value W of -1, the value is awated replicated to all replica nodes and awaited for confirmation by all until timeout occurs which is defined by WRITE_CONFIRMATION_TIMEOUT. It may be possible that not all nodes return ack within expected time frame in which case nothing is can be done but the response is returned to user about how many replicas were able to confirm the write. As of this moment there exist no mechanisms which can ensure that out of sync replicas can sync it self (Maybe a exercise for future). For WRITE_QUORUM W such that is belong in range [0, REPLICA_COUNT], W number of replicas are awated for write confirmation until timeout occurs. 


# Tracing 
7. At this point, I think I've reached to the point where debugging any issues is getting harder. Therefore, I've decided to add tracing to the system to track the path a reqeust takes. This will also save me hasle of finding correct items in logs. So tracing it is.
8. Now that tracing is available in both GET /v1/data and POST /v1/data endpoints it will be easy for my to find out path a request takes through the cluster and debug if necessary. At this point I might be following the best practices in tracing but it works and I am find with it.

# Persistence 
9. Next action item for me is to decide whether to go with persistence with LSM trees of deciding which node is the present owner of the key range. There are few scenarios I can think of at the moment in which can the owner of key range can change. First when a new node is added to cluster, second when a node becomes unresponsive or dies, third when we want to remove a node from the cluster. At this point I am not sure whether second and third case needs to be handled separately I am keeping them separate. At present, I think both problems are independent of each other and can be tackled in any order. I am interested in both the problems and have few thoughts on each. I am of the opinion, I should go be persistence problem first because when I have persistence in picture, I will be able to shutdown nodes and start them again with existing data. Obviously there is a lot more to it. When a dead node comes back online it may not have all the update to date information for which it will have to run replication (which is already there) and there needs to be a antri-entropy to be added to nodes as well so that each replica node can ensure it has all the data it should for in the event of owner node dies. So lets start with persistence using LSM Trees
10. Why LSM Trees? Previously I have given extensive thoughts on how persistence can be implemented with least efforts that can get the job done. In each case there is a need of commit-log or wal. To prevent wal from growing too big in size there is a need of rotation. Data can be kept in memory for service reads and writes fasts and wal adds persistence but in the case of node failure recovery will be slow since reading from wal will be slow. For which I thought of checkpointing. The idea behind checkpointing is can will persist point-in-time view of key values in memory and therefore when recovery is required wal/commit-log can be replayed on the checkpoints reducing the time to recovery. However, lifecycle of checkpoints needs to be maintained, wal/commit-log lifecycle will be required to maintain. Additionally method of storing all required data in memory increases our memory requirements a lot. Memory isn't cheap these days. So storing all data in disk should be an option - in which case there will be need to optimise read paths. Essentially we have rediscovered LSM Trees. 
11. LSM trees has few working component. A memtable, commit-log, sstables, bloomfilter. Any write is first written to commit-log and then inserted into the memtable. There are few challenges that I am thinking about right now. The challenges arises in write path when integrating memtable. At present, when a write comes to owner node the owner node atomically reads the current version and adds new value to data-store with increased which ensures the verions per key are increased monotonically. That is to say - at present when a write comes there is a need to find the most recent recent version of the key and new values are written with new version which is one higher than most recent version. However, with LSM trees there can be multiple versions of keys lying around different sstables which are eventually compacted therefore finding the most recent version can be time consuming operation. I am of the opinion instead of using key level versions node level versions counters can be used. I am still not confident about using timestamps. I want to avoid using timestamps till it make sense to me. Right now, timedrift is the reason I am not confident about timestamps. So when using node level version, any new write gets a version which is unique across all the keys. With this, when a write comes it persisted with global version and for two independent writes to same queue at same point in time will get two different versions. The key value pair with higher version will always be considered final winner. That is, last write wins. For replication - tupple of  (key, value, version) are replicated. There is still a question - the question is how far can versions go? Even for really large data type, say 64 bit ints, eventually the counter will run out. For this, I am of the opinion that node level version should be combination of timestamp & a counter. Quick google search reveals that network time protocols can make machines on local network be in sync for upto 1ms, where as accuracy of typical internet based NTP range from 5ms to 100ms. Based on this information - I think each node can maintain a version as a combination of timestamp with seconds level precision and a counter which resets every second. With this approach - each second the counter will reset and counter will never overflow. So I just some maths I realised that for 100K wps the 64 bit counter will take 5 million years to exhaust. In all probability I have less time than that to live so 64bit counter should make sense. However there is additional reason why timestamp & counter combination make sense. I am thinking of scenario where node A is owner of range [X, Y] and node B is owner of (Y, Z]. In this scenario assuming that node A receives a lot of write traffic & node B receives less than that such that the counter of node A is far ahead than that of node B. Lets say a write for key K1 comes to node A. At the time of write node A it as counter 100 and node B is at counter 50 which results in (K1, VAL1, VER100) written to node A and replicated to node B. Then node A fails which causes node B to take over as owner for range [X, Y] as well such that node B owns [X, Z] range. Now when a write comes to node B for same key K1 the node B will attempt to write (V1, K2, Ver50). Notice the Ver50. Previously we established that higher version number signify the most recent write and there fore higher version writes always win over lower version writes in which, ideally, V1 w/ K2 being the most recent write should win however since the counter value of Node B was lower than that of node A all the writes in node B for keys which originally belong to node B will essentially be lost in compaction stage. Therefore, I am of the opinion that timestamp & version counter is the correct method to go for. When using timestamps and counter pair for versioning, when node A fails and node B takes over, the new writes to node B for keys which were originally owned by node B will have higher timestamps and thus will eventually win in compaction. 
12. Now that I've decided that go with lsm trees, the next step is actually implementing the LSM Trees. There must exist the libraries for LSM Trees but given this is the learning exercise I am going to implement those myself. So far, I am thinking that a LSM Tree can be a struct which exposes Write api. The write api takes in key & value. Internally LSMT maintains in own atomic counter which is unsigned 64 bit int ( we dont need negatives in counter). For everytime there is a write, first a next version is requested atomically, the moment we have next counter, first the write is attempted in commit-log. Commit log writes in the append only log-file. The contents that are written in log file are version, key, value. At this moment I am not worried about CRC (cyclic redundancy checks) but those are important. I have discussed about CRC's [here](./crc_vs_msd.md) essentially CRC help ensuring integrity of data that is written. Lets say, in the middle of writting to commit-log the node crashes or write stops mid way for any other reason, in those scenarios the value might not have been written completely hence there is need of CRC. But for now, I'll start with only version, key & value and once I've a working system, I'll add the CRC. As soon as the value is written to the commit-log successfully the write is considered successfull. After the key value and version are written to commit-log, data is then upserted in a in-memory store. The in-memory store is a hashtable with 'key' with lookup key in the hashtable and version, value pair being the value of the hashtable. To prevent in-memory store for keep growing in size - as soon as in-memory store reaches a certain size (in terms of number of keys) then the all data of the in-memory store are flushed to disk and then the in-memory store starts from empty for new write operations. Implementing this operation, in my opinion is not challenging and can be achieved relatively easily. However, all the nexts after this are not trivial. Data of the in-memory store is persistented into the disk as a SSTable. A SSTable, in my understanding so far, isn't just a single file with key value data which is sorted on keys. It is more complicated than that. A SSTable is itself is not as  simple as a file containing key value pair sorte on asc order of key. In SSTable, there is a bloomfilter and a file on disk. The bloom filter helps quickly checking if current SSTable doesn't contain the required key (or may contain the required key). So, for each SSTable there are few things that comes together to make it work. Each sstable is essentially a file on a disk. Each file contains three things. First is the actual key value mapping, then second is a bloom filter and third is index (normally sparse index). The key value mapping in sstable file are stored in following format "<KLen><KEY><VLen><VAL><KLen><KEY><VLen><VAL>" the comes the bloom filter and then sparse indexed. The last fixed number of bytes in the sstable file contains the offset of bloom filter and sparse index. So, now we have a sstable. There is so much that can be done with sstable file which stores the key,value mapping. Given the file is stored in disk, contents of which are fetched for read queries it can be optimised for OS level operations. Simply put the contents in the file can be written such that a key & value being lookedup up can optimised to be aligend with OS page such that retrival for those key & value can be done with single OS page fetch. After thinking about it a alot I've decided I am not going to worry about sparse index and os page level optimizations. That could be a exersise of later on. So SSTable is a datastructure with key, value & version tuples sorted on asc order of key. In the end there is a index and a bloom filter. Now, if after every few number of writes a SSTable is created the number of SSTables will continue to grow that means at the time of searching for a key we will have to look through all the files, granted the bloomfilter will narrow down the files to be searched but still for each key search the bloom filter of each SSTable will have to be queried and then for each table which may contain the key will have to scanned which is slow. For this reason after a certain number of SSTables have been created those should be merged. This operation is called Compaction. In compaction two or more SSTables are merged into a larger SSTable. After the operation is completed the original SSTables are removed. In this operation if both SStables contains the key, the value corresponding to higher version are kept. And I just realised that I've not implemented remove/delete key operation. The best which is available at the moment which is closest to removing is updating value of key with 'null' but in this case key still remains in the store. I am aware of about tombstone but I have a situation in mind which I dont know how can be avoided at the moment. Situation: There is a possible problem I see with tomstone approach. Lets say the for compaction there are three files A, B, C. C is the oldest then B and A is the newest. Lets say, in A the value of key k1 was deleted and marked as tomstone=true w/ version 3. In B the k1 has value v2, version 2 & C has k1 as v1 & version=1. Now lets say C is compacted with A resulting in AC and then AC is compacted with B resulting in ACB. But in this order, given A has tombstone k1 will be deleted and then when AC (it has no k1) is compacted with B it will get k1 with v2 which is wrong. I think the one possible solution here is ordering the compaction. That is to say that compaction. After doing some reading I have realised that "Compaction Strategies" is a rabit hole in it self. As such I've decided to focus on it later and first I should start by first implementing commit-log. Note: Continue reading https://www.alibabacloud.com/blog/an-in-depth-discussion-on-the-lsm-compaction-mechanism_596780 to understand compaction strategies.
13. For commit-log, any write that comes into the system is first written to the commit-log then added to in-memory store. If a node shutsdown/crashes while writing (or after writting) to commit-log, then it should be able to recover/restore its current in-memory store from the commit-log. This also involves handling incomplete/corrupted writes to commit-log as well.
14. At this moment, I've successfully added initial implementation of LSM Tree with commitlog and in-memory store. For commitlog a replay functionality is still needed. This replay functionality is needed to restore the LSM trees in memory store's state. To make sure I have a clearer picture of what needs to be done, here is all the action items / milestones I can think of. commitlog, in-memroy store, functionality to restore in-memory store of LSMTree in the event of crash using commitlog, flush in-memory store to SSTable (interesting part here would be to flush without blocking writes), reading from SSTables, adding bloomfilters to sstables, adding sparse index to sstables, optimizing sstables for OS page cache, SSTable compaction, adding mechanisms in LSM Tree to ensure LSM Tree can keep track sstables and other required state across restarts.