# LSM Trees, their sparse indexes and OS Page Caches
LSM Tree uses SSTable internally to store key value pair. The single SSTable can contains thousands of key value pair in them. When a request comes in LSM Tree to get the value of key K1, then first the value is looked up in the in-memory store, if found then good otherwise the value is lookked up in the available SSTables. Given there can be a large  number of SSTables at a time there exist a bloomfilter per sstable which helps narrow down the search. For each sstable - the bloomfilter can confidently confirm if requried data is not present in it or can say maybe-yes if it is possible that data might/might not be present in the sstable. Now, if the bloomfilter says that data might be presetn in the sstable, we want to get the data if its actually there other wise return null to the user. However, going through the entire sstable each time can be really slow, therefore a index in created for each sstable. The index is the key vs offset map for each sstable. That is, for all the keys in the sstable the index contains the offset of the key. The offset means that offset at which the key exist in the sstable file on the disk. Now, the index is also sorted on keys and therefore the binary search is used to quickly look for the key and find its offset. For really larse sstables it is possible that it contains a really large number os keys. In which case it becomes im-practical to store all the keys in index. In which case the parse -index is used. The way sparse index is created is really interesting and optimised for efficiency in read path. All the key value pairs are divided into 4kb size blocks. The 4kb size block is decided based on os page cache size. For each block the first key is maintained in the sparse index. This means that the sparse index store drastically less data than actually number of keys. And the offset agains each key is such that it points to first byte of each block which opitimised for OS page cache lookup. It is important to understand that Operating Systems consider each file in them as a collection of 4kb blocks called os pages. So, for example, if 100bytes are requested from offset 4000 of a file A, then the OS actually does to reads of 4kb each and loads them in memory. The OS first reads the first block of 4kb for 96 bytes and then reads the another page of 4kb in size to rest of the 4bytes. When it is said the os read a page it  means that reading the bytes from physical media to physical memory. The sparse index in SSTable is designed such that instead of storing all keys and their offset the sparse index stores only the first key of each 4kb page (or block). That way when a random string is requested from SSTable, then the block is searched from the sparse index using binary search which should contain the key and then that block is fetched. Given that fact that the block (or offset) is aligned to OS Page cache there is only single read call involved. Then, the requried key is searched in the block and if found value is returned.