# Consistent Hashing
So far, I have created a basic web server with get and post endpoint for key value storage. Single server is handling all the trafic. Next step is to add more nodes to distribute traffic betweent them.

1. I can start multiple instance of the server for them to handle reads and write. But with this approach they are two independent systems handling traffic.

2. At this point if two storage nodes are running on localhost:8080 and localhost:8081, then users need to know about their ip and port and then decide themselves where to send request. For example: user can decide that hash(key)%2 == 0 goes to 8080 and then hash(key)%2==1 goes to 8081.
3. With this approch user is able to handle twice the amount of traffic then before, assuming hash function has ideal characteristics.
4. However, with this approach, if each storage node can handle only 2 Gb of data, that is 4 gb in total, and storage requrements of the user increases further to say 5 gb, then addiotional storage node is required.
5. When user adds additonal storage node, the total number of nodes are now 3. So keys are needed to devided among three nodes. Therefore, for any read or write request hash(key)%3=0 goes to 8080, hash(key)%3=1 goes to 8081, hash(key)%3=2 goes to 8082. Which on the surface works. But it has a serious problem. For example: when there were two storage nodes a key k1 was storaged in storage node 8080 because hash(k1)%2=0 hence all reads and writes for this key k1 should go to 8080 node; however when a new node 8082 was added it is possible that hash(k1)%3 maybe 0, 1 or 2. In case the hash(k1) is 1 or 2 any reads and write for this key will go to either 8081 or 8082 which is incorrect. 
6. There is one additional problem with this simple apparoch. In our approach, all the possible keys are distributed equally among storage nodes assuming hash(key) is ideal. But it maybe possible that a particular key is getting huge amonts of reads and/or writes in which case storage node of that key will be getting huge traffic compared to other nodes. this can be problamatic because the stoarge node of key k1 might struggle to handle traffic of other other keys in its storage. The purpose of adding additional nodes was to distribute traffic among them to increase capacity however, with this hot-key problem the single storage node is getting to much traffic that it is not able to handle traffic of other nodes in its stoarge. Ideally key distribution among nodes should be such that it equally distributes traffic among nodes.
7. For this reason we use consistent hashing. In consistent hashing, there is ring which represents all possible key values. storage nodes are placed on the ring such that it handles all the traffic belong to key range in clockwise direction until other storage node is encountered.
8. For the purpose of this learning, lets start with consistent hashing ring with single node. The node initially handles all the traffic. Then we will add another node, the other node will take over the ownership of second half of the range.