# Distributed Storage Nodes
Distributed storage nodes is developed to gain the working knowledge of how storage system like cassandra databases work in production and provide some of the features. With this project I am particullarly interested in learning
1. how cassandra does replication using merkle tree on live production data which has writes happening
2. writes to storage nodes are handled to provide durability
3. reads are offered by storage nodes
4. quorom is implemented to prodivde tunable consistency
5. understand node failure are handled. Particularly, I want to understand how other nodes decide a particular node is dead and then take over.
6. how consistent hashing is implemented. With this I am particularly interested in understanging how nodes take over the load of dead nodes
7. how is it decided that which node will handle the incoming request.
8. Understand the working of gossip protocol.
9. Implement a method such that any node can handle arbitary traffic, such that, if it receives traffic for request/data which it doesn't own then it redirects the traffic to original node.

## PRD
Go is used, because I am familiar with it and nice developer experience.

1. There are storage nodes. 
2. Each storage node handles subset of data based on key range.
3. Cluster is collection of storage node, with atleast 1 storage node.
4. Communication happens using REST over HTTP. For the purpose of this project REST is sufficient.
5. We can remove the concept of cluster or coordinator node entirely, and when an node starts we can supply the seed node which can act as cluster node.


# Adding Gossip & Enabling nodes to handle all traffic
In my attempt to create distributed storage nodes in order to learn a lot of principles of distributed systems and cassandra. I have gotten this far - I've storage nodes and a coordinator nodes.

coordinator node is also called cluster. 

each time a new node is started, it has no "id", "host" and "EndOfKeyRange" details in it. In cluster there is a endpoint /addnode which add nodes information it in list of known nodes and also updates the node metadata in the node by called /node/init endpoint on storage node. which adds id, host, and EndOfKeyRange details in the node.

EndOfKeyRange property of the storage node directly tells node what range of hashes (hases of key) in the consistent-hash-ring it is responsible for. If a node has EndOfKeyRange as X, then it handles the traffic of hash<=X. FOr more details if there are three nodes in consistent-hash-ring with EndOfKeyRange values of nodea->10, nodeb->50, nodec->100, then nodea handles traffic of all hashes of key <=10, nodeb handles (10,  50], nodec handles (50, 100].

each storage node in the cluster also has gossip behavior, when nodes are added to cluster using /addnode endpoint in cluster, all existing nodes are informed about new-nodes using /updategossip endpoint. when node receives gossip on /updategossip endpoint, they add the new node their their 'gossipNodes' list that they maintain. in the list they maintain information about all known nodes along with the host (ip:port), their id  (uuid), their EndOfKeyRange, and their lastUpdate (timestamp field).

anytime a node recieves get or post traffic, it checks whether it owns the key, that is hash(key) ->token is <= EndOfKeyRange among all nodes, if so then it handles the traffic other wise it find the owner and redirects the traffic to owner nodes and serves the response.

all nodes also gossip on fixed interval letting all known nodes with its own updated timestamp. there fore each node maintains withit all known nodes and their lastKnown update timestamp in cluster (gossip protocol)


# Removing Cluslter Abstraction
1. At present, new node is needed to be added into the cluster manually. When new node is added into cluster using /addnode endpoint, cluster informs all other nodes in the cluster about new node using /upategossip endpoint. Then the nodes take over the responsibility to informing other nodes about their health status using gossip protocol. 
2. Now that I've had more time to think about design and implementation; need of cluster seems unnecessary. I am thinking when new node start up, it can be supplied seed node, that is, the details of existing nodes. New node then can communicate with supplied nodes to get more detailed picture of the cluster.
3. Also, at present when new node is created, the node gets to decide its EndOfKeyRange property. After reading more about it, this is not the normal approach, normally, the node joins the largest range. I am thinking, we can make things easier and support both my approach and the "normal" way. 
4. I am going to implement following functionality. When the first node starts, it alone. There are no seed nodes. It services traffic alone and becomes the seed node for future nodes. Further ndoes that start up, gets the first node details as seed node and with gossip gets more detailed picture into the cluster.
5. When new node starts up, it may optionally provide its EndOfKeyRange. If EndOfKeyRange is provided, it joins the cluster with that range, otherwise, when node starts gossiping - it waits sometime to have more clear picture of the cluster and then - decides its EndOfKeyRange. (Possible: I am aware that it maybe possible that if two nodes start at the same time may get the same picture of the cluster and may decide on same EndOfKeyRange. I will get back to this in future - maybe)
6. Also, when new node starts up and has EndOfKeyRange, it will start to serve data without replication. Replication is  going to nice brain exercise soon.
7. Cluster abstraction is removed. We can start with following 
```
# start a node, this node will act as seed node for other nodes
# to find more details on support flags using go run nodes/main.go --help
go run nodes/main.go -eokr=18446744073709551615 -host=http://0.0.0.0:7770

# start other nodes 
go run nodes/main.go -port=7771 -seed=http://0.0.0.0:7770 -eokr=9223372036854775808 -host=http://0.0.0.0:7771

go run nodes/main.go -eokr=4611686018427387904 -host=http://0.0.0.0:7772 -port=7772 -seed=http://0.0.0.0:7770
```

# New Node with Data Replication 
1. At present, system has now reached to point where nodes are decoupled nodes and no need of cluster or coordinator. New nodes can be spun up with details of seed node and can further communicate with other nodes in cluster using gossip protocol.
2. So far, when new nodes are added into the cluster they takeover the ownership of keys lying in its EndOfKeyRange without ensuring weather it has all of available data of that range to serve reads.
3. To get to the point where new nodes, when added to the cluster, esure they replicate all the data into their storage before they start serving, I need to introduce concept of state. New node start with 'joining' state. Once new nodes have enough information of cluster from all the gossiping, they change their state to Bootstraping. During this state, they have decided their EndOfKeyRange, it start replicating data from source node. Once replication is complete and all new writes are also available in the new node it changes state to available. It also informs the orginal owner node about it state change to 'available' immediately along with its EndOfKeyRange, so that all the writes that original node is getting will now be redirected to new node. 
4 Detailed thought process: two nodes A & C in cluster are serving traffic with [0, X] & (X, Z] as their key ranges respectively. A new node B is inserted into cluster. This node has its EndOfKeyRange provided when it started (I'll think about auto calculating EndOfKeyRange later). All new nodes start with state "Joining". New Node B starts with seednode as A. Node B gossips with the other nodes in cluster and gets detailed picture. After sometime, lets say 3 cycles of gossips (or fixed time or so that the number of unique nodes in gossips list doesn't change - that would mean  new node has info of all nodes in cluster), new node B starts next phase "Bootstrapping".  In this phase, new node B request source node, say node C, for all data that should be under the ownership of node B. While this is happening, original owner node C will continue to serve reads and write. While the replication is going on, handling read traffic is trivial. Read traffic can be served from original node. However, handling write traffic isn't as trivial. There are few things that comes to my mind when I think of this challenge. First is dual write. In this while the replication is 
going on, all the writes that are coming the owner node will be written to owner node's storage as well as new node's storage. This approach is however prone to a race-condition. Example: assume key K with value V1 is stored in owner node. During replication key K and vlaue V1 is read from owner node and is in flight towards the new node but during that time write comes for K with value V2. This write is successfully written to owner node. So owner node contains K, V2. Also, this write is asynchronously sent to new node. It is possible that new key value (K, V2) beats the original request to replicate key K with value V1 such that the new node has value (K, V2) in store then the original replication request with (K, V1) comes, then the new node will have key value of (K, V1) even though replication has succeeded and original node has (K, V2). To handle this, I am thinking along the lines of versions. timestamps are easy solution to this problem, key and value with higher timestamps wins, however, timestamps do not work in real world distributed systems because of timedrift challenges related to time syncrhonization. Therefore, for versions, I am thinking using counters. The very first time a key and value is written it gets version 1. Subsequent writes on that key increases the version counter (there is still the challenge of atomic writes in storage, but that shouldn't as challenging). Lets go through the original example with this versioning system. Original node and (Key K, Value V1, Version 1) in storage. new node request replication. original node and new node starts the replication process. While the replication is going on, read requests are served by original node. When write request comes for (Key K, Value V2) - original node services the write such that (Key K, Value 2, Version 2) is now stored in original nodes storage. Original node also send aync write request of (Key K, Value V2, Version 2) to new node while the original repication request (Key K, Value V1, Version 1) is still in flight. Similar to previous scenario, the original replication request gets delayed and new request of version 2 reaches the new node first. Therefore the original node has (Key K, Value V2, Version 2) in its storage. And then the original request reaches the new node (Key K, Value V1, Version 1). However when it comes to mutating the storage it will fail because the Version 1 is lower than Version 2. With this approach, the original node and new node is guaranteed to eventually converge to same state (unless the request fails).
5. In the approach outlined above using versions to ensure both new and old node convere to same approach. Replication ensures that old data is consumed and new data is available as it comes. However, I still have figured out when does replication stop.? Lets say the original node is getting bombarded with writes for the key range range it owns and this is the exact reason we are adding additional node to take some load off it. In that scenario, the new writes are comming as replication is happening. To be more concrete, assume replication can handle 1 key/sec. And new writes are coming to original node with new keys which now lie in new nodes key range at the same rate of 1 key/sec. In this scenario - the replication process will go on indefinitely and new node will indefinitely remain unuseable, defeating the purpose of why it was added in the first place. This challenge is easier to handle than the previous one, imo. When new node starts the replication with original node. Any writes that happen the key range out side of new node that lies in the onwership of original node remains unaffected. And there are two possible types of write that can happen on the key range the new node is responsible. Either the write is to mutate the existing key or insert a new key. After the replication has started, any new writes which inserts a new key into the store will directly be redirected to new node. And mutations will be written in original store and new node as well. With this approach. This approach ensures there is finite key space for replication to handle. And once that finite set is replicated, new node has all dataset it should. For reads during replication, the original node does parallel search in original node and old node and return the value with highest version. After replication has completed successfully, the new node updates its status to "Available", informs orignal node immediately. So that original node will now redirect all read and writes traffic to new node. There are certain challenges still in this design. Challenges: if new node fails to complete replication, writes for key, value are lost.